[air/output] Turn new output engine ON per default (#35129)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/ray-air/experimental-features.rst

.. _air-experimental-features:

================================
Experimental features in Ray AIR
================================

We're testing a number of experimental features in Ray AIR.

During development and internal dogfooding, the features
are disabled per default. You can opt-in by setting an

> environment variable.

Author: Yes, that's right. Updated wording

the old implementation and make the new implementation the
default.

.. note::

    Experimental features can undergo frequent changes,
    especially on the master branch and the nightly wheels.

.. _air-experimental-new-output:

New output engine
-----------------

.. note::

    This feature is *enabled per default* starting Ray 2.5.

    To disable, set the environment variable ``RAY_AIR_NEW_OUTPUT=0``.

We've added a new output engine for Ray Train and Ray Tune runs.

The new output engine will affect how the training progress
is printed in the console.

The new features include:

- Ray Train runs will report status relevant to the single training run.
  It will not use the default Ray Tune table layout from before.
- The table format has been updated.
- We report configurations and observed metrics in a different format
- The default metrics displayed for e.g. RLlib runs are heavily reduce
  in the console output.
- We generally uncluttered a lot of output and made it easier to
  read.

The new output currently only works for the regular console.
Notably, it is automatically disabled when Jupyter Notebooks
or Ray client is used.

.. _air-experimental-rich:

> Sticky table layout

Reviewer: can we comment on how this relates to the above output engine?

Author: Is the first sentence enough?

> As part of the :ref:`new output engine <air-experimental-new-output>`,
we've introduced a sticky table layout.

Reviewer: ok, thanks

-------------------

.. note::

    This feature is *disabled per default*.

>     To enable, set the environment variable ``RAY_AIR_ENABLE_RICH=1``.

Reviewer: Either say that this is based on the library "rich", or change the name, as it's otherwise non-telling

Author: Renamed

Author: Actually, still keeping the "rich" term as the functionality may extend beyond sticky tables. Rich is the dependency needed to make this work. I'll update the wording below to make this a bit more clear.

As part of the :ref:`new output engine <air-experimental-new-output>`,
we've introduced a sticky table layout. The regular console
logs will continue to be printed as before, but the trial
overview table (in Ray Tune) will be stuck to the bottom of the

> screen and periodically updated.

Reviewer: could we get a side-by-side comparison (images) so that we can convince users why they should try it? this comment goes for every feature.

Author: I've added a screenshot for the sticky status. For the new output it's hard to capture the changes in one screenshot, and they will also continually evolve. Since it's enabled per default, I'd like to just keep it as people will experience it anyway. I don't think there is much utility in providing a detailed comparison.

The new execution engine only affects internal implementation.

Reviewer: thanks!

.. _air-experimental-features:

================================
Experimental features in Ray AIR
================================

> We're testing a number of experimental features in Ray AIR.

Reviewer 2: I try to remove "we" when I can for the same reason. Perhaps you can replace with something like "The following features in Ray AIR are experimental and undergoing testing."

> We're testing a number of experimental features in Ray AIR.

Reviewer 2: Or be explicit by saying "The Ray Team is testing a number of experimental features in Ray AIR."

> We're testing a number of experimental features in Ray AIR.

Author: I'm going with "The Ray Team .." for now. I personally like active voice ("we...") better but am happy to follow our conventions :-)

During development and internal dogfooding, the features
are disabled per default. You can opt-in by setting a
feature-specific environment variable.

After some time, we enable the feature per default to gather
more feedback from the community. In that case, they can still

> be disabled using the same environment variable. This will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
disable the feature using the same environment variable to
```

> fully revert to the old behavior, should the new behavior

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fully revert to the old behavior.
```

> not suffice your needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

If you run into issues with experimental features,
please `open an issue <https://github.com/ray-project/ray/issues/>`_

> on GitHub and let us know! This will give

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on GitHub. This will give
```

us the chance to incorporate your feedback before we remove

> the old implementation and make the new implementation the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the old implementation and making the new implementation the
```

default.

.. note::

    Experimental features can undergo frequent changes,
    especially on the master branch and the nightly wheels.

.. _air-experimental-new-output:

> New output engine

Reviewer 2: I would caution against using "new" in user documentation. It's a temporary condition and is obvious when the doc is has not been updated in a while.

Author: Renamed to "Context-aware"

-----------------

.. note::

>     This feature is *enabled per default* starting Ray 2.5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This feature is *enabled by default* in Ray 2.5.
```

    To disable, set the environment variable ``RAY_AIR_NEW_OUTPUT=0``.

> We've added a new output engine for Ray Train and Ray Tune runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An additional output engine is available for Ray Train and Ray Tune runs.
```

> The new output engine will affect how the training progress

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This output engine affects how the training progress
```

is printed in the console.

> The new features include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The features include:
```

> - Ray Train runs will report status relevant to the single training run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ray Train runs report status relevant to the single training run.
```

>   It will not use the default Ray Tune table layout from before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  It does not use the default Ray Tune table layout from previous versions.
```

- The table format has been updated.

> - We report configurations and observed metrics in a different format

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The format of reporting configurations and observed metrics is different from pervious versions.
```

> - The default metrics displayed for e.g. RLlib runs are heavily reduce

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The default metrics displayed for runs (e.g., RLlib runs) are significantly reduced
```

>   in the console output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> - We generally uncluttered a lot of output and made it easier to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Decluttered the output to improve readability.
```

>   read.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 
```

> The new output currently only works for the regular console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This output feature only works for the regular console.
```

> Notably, it is automatically disabled when Jupyter Notebooks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is automatically disabled when you use Jupyter Notebooks
```

> or Ray client is used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or Ray clients.
```

Author: ```suggestion
or Ray client.
```

.. _air-experimental-rich:

Rich layout (sticky status)
---------------------------

.. note::

>     This feature is *disabled per default*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This feature is *disabled by default*.
```

    To enable, set the environment variable ``RAY_AIR_RICH_LAYOUT=1``.

> As part of the :ref:`new output engine <air-experimental-new-output>`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :ref:`new output engine <air-experimental-new-output>`,
```

> we've introduced an advanced layout using the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has an advanced layout using the
```

`rich <https://github.com/Textualize/rich>`_ library.

> In the current iteration, the *rich* layout provides a sticky

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The *rich* layout provides a sticky
```

> status table: The regular console logs will continue to be printed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
status table: The regular console logs are still printed
```

> as before, but the trial overview table (in Ray Tune) will be stuck to the bottom of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as before, but the trial overview table (in Ray Tune) is stuck to the bottom of the
```

screen and periodically updated.

This feature is still in development. You can opt-in to try
it out.

> To opt-in, you need to set the ``RAY_AIR_RICH_LAYOUT=1`` environment variable

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To opt-in, set the ``RAY_AIR_RICH_LAYOUT=1`` environment variable
```

> and have rich installed (``pip install rich``).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and have install rich (``pip install rich``).
```

Author: ```suggestion
and install rich (``pip install rich``).
```

.. figure:: images/rich-sticky-status.png

.. _air-experimental-execution:

> New trial execution engine

Reviewer 2: Consider giving the trial execution engine a name to replace `new`.

Author: Renamed to "Event-based trial execution engine"

--------------------------

.. note::

>     This feature is *enabled per default* starting Ray 2.5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This feature is *enabled by default* starting Ray 2.5.
```

    To disable, set the environment variable ``TUNE_NEW_EXECUTION=0``.

> We've implemented a new trial execution engine in Ray Tune.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ray Tune has a different trial execution engine.
```

> Since Ray Tune is currently also the execution backend for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since Ray Tune is also the execution backend for
```

> Ray Train, this affects both tuning and training runs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ray Train, the updated engine affects both tuning and training runs.
```

> Technically, we've refactored the :ref:`TrialRunner <trialrunner-docstring>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The update is a refactor of the :ref:`TrialRunner <trialrunner-docstring>`
```

> to use a new, generic Ray actor and future manager instead of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
uses a generic Ray actor and future manager instead of
```

> the old ``RayTrialExecutor``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the previous ``RayTrialExecutor``.
```

> Our CI and release tests all run (and pass) with the new execution engine.

Reviewer 2: Agree with Matt's comment. This is assumed and may make readers wonder why you need to mention this specifically here.

> In most cases, you should not see any change to the previous

Reviewer 3: What changes _are_ expected?

behavior.

> However, if you notice any odd behavior, you can try to opt out of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, if you notice any odd behavior, you can opt out of
```

the new execution engine and see if it resolves your problem.

In that case, please `open an issue <https://github.com/ray-project/ray/issues/>`_
on GitHub, ideally with a reproducible script.

Things to look out for:

- Less trials are running in parallel than before
- It takes longer to start new trials (or goes much faster)

> - The tuning run finished, but the script does not exit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The tuning run finishes, but the script does not exit
```

- The end-to-end runtime is much slower than before
- The CPU load on the head node is high,
  even though the training jobs don't
  require many resources or don't run on the head node
- Any exceptions are raised that indicate an error in starting or

>   stopping trials or the experiment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  stopping trials or the experiment
```

> Again, we're testing against all these potential regressions, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that some edge cases may not be captured in the regression tests. Your feedback is welcome.
```
